.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Koans of the Way of Reality, Case 108.
The Great Pearls, Dana, Prologue.
Giving generously means non-greed, not withholding.
One phrase, one verse, the ten thousand things, the hundred grasses.
One Dharma, one realization, all Buddhas, all ancestors.
Since the beginningless beginning, there has never been a single thing to withhold.
When the Way is relinquished to the Way, the Way is realized.
When the Way is realized, the Way is manifested through itself.
When the self gives the self simply for the sake of giving, the whole universe gives of itself for the sake of giving.
The cause and effect of this purposeless giving prevails throughout the heavens and encompasses the earth.
How can this truth be realized?
How can this truth be realized?
Listen to this old teaching.
The main case.
A monk asked the Great Pearl.
By what means can the gateway of our school be entered?
By means of Dhanaparamita, the Great Pearl said.
According to the Buddha, the Bodhisattva path comprises six Paramitas.
Why then have you mentioned only one?
The Great Pearl said.
Deluded people fail to understand that the other five all proceed from Dhanaparamita.
And that by its practice, all the others are fulfilled.
The monk said, why is it called Dhanaparamita?
The teacher said, Dhanaparamita means relinquishment.
The monk asked, relinquishment of what?
The teacher answered, relinquishment of dualism of opposites.
It means total relinquishment of ideas as to the dual nature of good and bad, being and non-being, love and aversion, void and non-void, concentration and distraction, pure and impure.
By giving all of them up, we attain to a state in which all opposites are seen as empty.
The capping, capping verse.
You may understand it, but in vain.
You may believe it, but it's to no avail.
You may describe it, but it still remains a description.
Ultimately, how is it?
The river doesn't understand, yet it knows how to give itself to the great ocean.
The mountain has no words, yet it gives birth to the ten thousand things.
It is here that the sweet innocence of Dhanaparamita is revealed.
As most of you, as I look around the room, I realize that most of you have been here for the weekend, so you were part of the whole Dhanaparamita thing yesterday.
But there are also some that weren't here, so some of what I did as opening remarks to the Dhanaparamita, or the Perfection of Giving weekend, I'd like to repeat so that it's clear to everyone.
Dhana, we translate, for those of you that are new to the term, as giving.
Although giving doesn't quite reach it.
It's more than just something going from A to B.
It's the same as in the transmission of the Dharma.
We call it Dhanaparamita, and paramita means the practice of perfection, or crossing over to the other shore.
And these paramitas are part of Mahayana Buddhism.
And in Zen, we understand the crossing over to the other shore as either the other shore and this shore are the same, or rather the other shore arrives.
So, Dhanaparamita is understood loosely as the perfection of giving.
And as all of you must have realized yesterday in the process of doing that weekend,
that the teachers of this weekend were really the people that arrived on the buses.
You'd have to be totally blind and without any sensibility at all not to have received an incredible amount of teaching from our guests the weekend.
And that's at the heart of what Dhana is about.
There can be no Dhana unless there is both giving and receiving occurring simultaneously.
That's the heart of Dhana.
It goes both ways.
It must go both ways.
There can be no Dhana unless the giver and the receiver are unified, or become one reality in the process.
So, therefore, Dhana is not charity.
It's not generosity.
It's not almsgiving, or donation, or beneficence, or benevolence, or benefaction, or contribution, gift, philanthropy, offering.
Dhana is the practice of total relinquishment.
Relinquishment.
And that's what the great pearl was talking about.
Total relinquishment.
Letting go.
Not holding on to anything.
All the dualities must dissolve.
And needless to say, when all the dualities dissolve, each of those paramitas, each of the six paramitas are there.
Dhana, or giving, or the perfection of giving, is found throughout the Mahayana literature.
It appears in the precepts.
For example, be generous, do not be withholding.
That's Dhana.
It appears in the eight awarenesses of an enlightened person, the 52 aspects of a bodhisattva.
It appears in the paramitas.
It appears as part of the morality, the three basic teachings of the Buddha, one of which was morality.
So it's obviously considered by Buddhists to be one of the most important virtues.
It is the characteristic of a bodhisattva.
It's the life of a bodhisattva.
And in the prologue it says, giving generously means non-greed.
And if you really look at greed, you realize that greed is exactly the opposite.
Greed is about holding on.
And dhana is about letting go, not withholding, not holding back.
And then the prologue says, one phrase, one verse, ten thousand things, the hundred grasses,
one dharma, one realization, all Buddhas, all ancestors, since the beginning.
There has never been a single thing to withhold.
So that's the ultimate truth that underlies the whole thing.
We may proceed through the world with an illusion of separateness,
with the illusion that the self and other are separate things.
But the fact is, there is no separation to begin with.
That's why we call dharma, the ten thousand things, purity itself.
There's nothing extraneous.
There's no outside.
It's all unified, whether we've realized it or not.
If we haven't realized it and we proceed on the assumption that there's a self and other separation,
then we run into all kinds of difficulties.
That's what the pain and suffering of this life is about.
That's what we call samsara.
So, if you haven't realized it, although it's true,
you're not going in accord with that realization.
When you realize it or when you practice in accord with the truth of that unity,
then it's a whole different way of living your life.
There has never been a single thing to withhold.
Because each one of us, this very body and mind, your very body and mind,
is the body and mind of the universe.
Where would you hold it?
And who would you give it to?
And then the prologue says, when the way is relinquished to the way,
when you give the way to the way, the Tao, to the Tao,
the way is realized.
When the way is realized, the way is manifested through itself.
So, the way begins to manifest itself through itself when you've realized the way.
What does it mean to have realized the way?
It means to have unified with the way.
When you are the way itself, the way manifests through itself,
which is none other than manifesting through you.
And that's what the next line means.
When the self gives the self simply for the sake of giving,
the whole universe gives of itself for the sake of giving.
Again, that's about unification, no separation.
There's no reason for it.
There's no merit attached to it.
It's simply the way the universe is.
And so, the giving is simply for the sake of giving, for no other reason.
You can wash the dishes in order to have clean dishes.
That makes it functional.
There's a purpose.
There's a process.
And there's a result.
Or, you can wash the dishes to wash the dishes.
Just for the simple sake of washing the dishes.
So, the cause and effect of this purposeless giving prevails throughout the heaven and encompasses the earth.
That is, it is the nature of things.
Whether we've realized it for ourselves or not.
It's the nature of things.
So, this monk, in the main case, comes up to the great pearl.
And the great pearl is the successor of Matsu, the great master Basa, who had 84 enlightened disciples that he transmitted to.
Wei Hai is one of those disciples.
His name in Japanese is Daishu.
Daishu means great pearl.
Ikai.
He got the name great pearl because he first began studying with...
He was first ordained by another teacher.
And then went to study with Matsu and studied with him for a while.
And then the...
His first teacher became very ill.
And so, he left Matsu and went back to take care of his old teacher.
And while he was back there, he wrote a discourse.
And I'm trying to remember what that discourse was.
I guess it was a discourse on sudden elimination.
And a monk who was there took that treatise to Matsu.
And when Matsu read it, he said, there is a great pearl on that mountain.
And although he had the name Ikai, it was the name Daishu or great pearl that kind of stuck with him.
So, this monk asked the great pearl, by what means can the gateway of our school be entered?
And he answered, by means of Dhanaparamita.
And this koan is not a koan in the usual sense of the word.
It tends to be very explanatory.
And I think the reason is that it arose from a mundo rather than a dharmakambat, shosan.
Dharma combats tend to be more direct pointing, more head squeezing.
Mondos tend to be intellectual and explanatory.
And this is kind of intellectual and explanatory.
But it has some value because of his particular way of expressing it that I thought was important for us to use and to treat it as a koan.
So, he says, by means of Dhanaparamita.
So, the monk said, according to the Buddha, the Bodhisattva path comprises six paramitas.
Why then have you mentioned only one?
And the great pearl said, deluded people fail to understand that the other five all proceed from Dhanaparamita.
And it's by the practice, by its practice, the practice of giving, that all the others are fulfilled.
And in a sense, you can say that for any of the paramitas.
You can say that for any of the precepts.
You can say that for the eight gates of Zen.
That in each one of them, the other are contained.
And if you realize any one of them fully, you've realized that.
In fact, you can say that of any koan.
That if you exhaust the koan completely, thoroughly,
all of the ramifications and permutations and combination of a single koan, you've realized all of the koans.
And then the monk says, why is it called Dhanaparamita?
And he answers, Dhanaparamita means relinquishment.
Relinquishment of what?
Relinquishment of the dualism of opposites.
It means total relinquishment of ideas as to the dual nature of good and bad.
The being and non-being.
Love and aversion.
Void and non-void.
Concentration and distraction.
Pure and impure.
By giving all of them up, we attain to a state in which all opposites are seen as empty.
Now, we've talked about this a hundred thousand times in the fifteen years we've been here.
You know, these dual, these so-called opposites.
That every one of them are two parts of the same reality.
That because they are mutually arising,
because they're codependent, that is, one cannot exist without the other,
we can choose to see them as opposite, but we can also see them as codependent, mutually arising.
You can't have one without the other.
You can't have good without bad.
You can't have being without non-being.
You can't have love without aversion.
Or form without emptiness.
They're mutually arising.
It doesn't make sense, one of them.
Heads and tails are two parts of the same coin.
You can't have a coin that says heads.
So, it's because of the difference that they can arise.
So, we can understand them as two separate things, a la the differences,
or, because of their codependency, the same thing.
That's what the gashow is.
When we gashow and bring together the palms and bow to each other,
we're acknowledging the unity of these two things becoming one thing.
That's what the bow also is.
We bow to the sugar, and we bow to the shower, and we bow to each other,
and before entering a room, and all of that precedes that action.
All of that acknowledges that the action is, in reality, one thing, not two.
Now, that being the case, and I've talked about this before,
our tendency is we get caught up in that duality,
and we want to move away from the thing that's not good to the thing that's good.
We want to get rid of evil altogether and just have good.
We want to get rid of sickness and just have health.
We want to get rid of old age and just have young age.
We want to get rid of bad and have good.
We want to move away from one and go toward the other.
And we've built a society and a technology, a multi-trillion dollar business of selling to the people,
getting rid of one and going to the other.
You know, take this and you'll be healthy.
Take this and you'll stay young forever.
Take this and everybody will love you.
Nobody will hate you.
But, of course, there's no way that you can do that.
There's no way that you can get rid of one and have only the other.
They're two parts of the same reality.
So, ultimately, what the whole thing comes down to, as I've mentioned before,
is not so much a matter of annihilating one side and having the other side,
but rather a process of navigation or what we call the middle way.
It's the same way that you take a canoe down a river.
The river is filled with all kinds of obstructions, rocks, bad, freeway, good.
So, I want the freeway and I want to hit the rocks.
And so you learn to navigate the river.
But rivers have a characteristic of changing constantly.
I mean, look at the map of any river that's two years old
and then check out that river and you'll find that it's a very different river.
Every spring, it becomes a new river.
Its bends and twists and turns and so on
happen in accord with the amount of rain and the terrain and so on.
So, it's hard to make a map for it,
just like it's hard to make a map for how to live your life.
So, in order to navigate a river, you need to learn to read the river.
You need to know how to manage the equipment, the canoe.
More importantly, you need to be one with that canoe.
You need to respond to the river like a canoe responds to the river.
And you need to be very alert, aware, very conscious, very centered,
with single-pointedness of mind.
You get distracted just for a minute, you know.
You examine your fingernails and you've hit something, turned over.
All your equipment is now being carried down the river.
So, you need to be there, but without tension.
If you do it with a lot of tension,
it's okay if you're doing, you know, a mile of whitewater.
But if you're doing ten miles of whitewater,
you'll get so exhausted by the time you've gotten halfway through it
that you begin to lose all of that awareness and focus and so on.
So, you need to be able to do it without exhausting yourself.
And all of that is a perfect metaphor for life.
How to live one's life.
How to discern the middle way.
How to be able to navigate and respond to circumstances as they come up.
There's no warning ahead of time, you know.
There's no map in the world that's going to show you that, overnight,
a tree has just fallen across the river.
And you're coming down at a goodly clip.
The river is carrying you full speed.
And you come around this bend.
And there you are.
There's no passage.
There's a tree that's completely covering.
And its branches are hanging down like this.
And you have to respond.
What do you do?
It's kind of interesting.
And it happens.
All the time.
So, it's the same with our life.
There's no way to predict what's around the next bend.
There's no way to predict what the next barrier will be that we encounter.
So, all we can do is develop the skills for working with the barriers that come up.
And that's what practice is.
That's all it is.
Those skills are based on an underlying realization of the nature of things, of the nature of the self.
So, all the things we talk about are explanations of what the underlying truth is that can be realized.
And when you realize it, the explanations are useless.
The precepts are useless.
All the paramitas are useless because they become a manifestation of your own life.
You don't need that kind of explanation anymore.
You spontaneously respond in accord with things.
Relinquishment of the dualism of opposites.
I added some footnotes to this, starting off with a question that the monk asked.
By what means can the gateway of our school be entered?
The footnote says, what gate?
Where is he?
What's he saying?
Where is there a gate?
A gate means that there's some place that's inside the gate and outside the gate.
It's like when Nansen said the Tao is not an outside thing.
Joshua comes up and says, well, what's the, what is the, it's not an outside thing.
So what's the Tao, what is the Tao of outside things?
If the Tao is not an outside thing, then there must be another Tao.
And of course, Nansen knew that.
And as well as Joshua knew that.
There's no inside and outside.
There's no point of entry.
It reaches everywhere.
So right off, you can see where this monk is coming from.
And the great pearl was being very, he may have known something about this monk.
Maybe the monk was at a point in his practice where he needed explanations.
But somebody comes, come looking for a gate.
I would approach very differently.
The next question, the next statement.
He says, by means of Dhanaparamita.
The footnote says, unavoidably, this will lead to more doubt.
More questions.
And still, he must respond.
And then the monk says, according to the Buddha, the Bodhisattva path has six paramitas.
Why do you mention only one?
Footnote says, this one alone?
What's he talking about?
What's he talking about?
One.
And then the great pearl says, deluded people fail to understand that the other five all proceed from Dana.
And that by its practice, all the others are fulfilled.
The footnote says, what's the old man doing?
Don't create complications.
The more he feeds this guy words, the more the guy produces words.
Why is it called Dana?
Footnote says, be generous.
Give him the stick.
Drive him out.
Dana means relinquishment.
The master answers.
Where is this going, the footnote says.
Let's see some relinquishment.
The next line, relinquishment of what?
Footnote says, everything.
Shut up and sit.
But the master, being very compassionate and grandmotherly, says, relinquishment of the dualism of opposites.
Footnote says, too bad.
He's up to his nostrils in mud.
And the monk says, what does that mean?
And the old man says, it means total relinquishment of ideas as to the dual nature of good and bad, being and non-being, love and aversion, void and non-void, concentration and distraction, pure and impure.
By giving up all of them, we attain to a state in which all opposites are seen as empty.
Footnote says, I think he's drowned this monk with his words.
But say, did the monk get it?
Do you get it?
Basically, what he's talking about when he says relinquishment of all things is letting go.
Letting go.
And letting go, you know, comes up again and again.
We talk about it endlessly.
It's definitely part of the whole new age vernacular and everybody says it.
But what does it really mean?
Usually what it means when people hear the word non-attachment, they simply conclude it means not caring.
Of course, nothing could be further from the truth.
They think it means not loving, not caring.
All the way back into the 50s, that was the way the beat zen expressed itself.
I don't know.
I don't care.
And it doesn't matter anyway.
That was the, you know, the three truths of beat zen.
Well, you know, the only, only people that don't do zazen can make statements like that with red books.
Of course, we care.
And of course, it matters.
Not attachment doesn't mean not caring and not loving.
It means caring very much and loving very much.
You can't really love unless there is non-attachment.
So long as there's attachment, what you have is two things.
By the very nature of attachment, you have to have the attachee and the attachor.
That's two.
When these two merge, there can no longer be attachment.
There's nothing to attach to and no one to do the attaching.
That's what love is.
No separation.
That's what caring is.
No separation.
That's what dana is.
No separation.
That's what realization is.
No separation.
Whether we're talking about people or sound or form.
Form.
That's what Dogen meant when he said seeing form with the whole body and mind.
One understands it intimately.
Hearing sound with the whole body and mind.
One understands it intimately.
That intimacy is realization.
It's unity.
It's one thing.
So we call it letting go, non-attachment, forget the self, empty the mind, no mind, non-dual dharma, merging of differences.
Wonderful.
But how do you get there?
Well, you know, you can recite it in your head a hundred thousand times and try desperately to do it.
And, you know, you can do it.
You know, empathy is a kind of a practice in that direction.
But keep in mind, empathy with someone is still separation.
It's not yet unity.
Unity.
That's the difference between doing good and compassion.
In doing good, there's still separation.
In compassion, there's no sense of doer or the person that's being done.
Self and other.
Or act of doing.
It just happens.
Spontaneously.
The way the spring breeze warms the earth.
It doesn't know what it's doing.
The earth doesn't know about the spring breeze.
So how do we do it?
Well, no matter how you cut it in this practice,
no matter where you look to it,
no matter what the teachings are,
if we're talking about liturgy or the precepts or art practice, body practice, koans,
whatever it is, it all comes down to the old furnace of zazen.
The process of falling away of body and mind.
And we begin that process by working with the body,
and then with the breath,
and then the mind.
And as the process gets deeper,
and the body falls away,
off sensation of the body.
Mind is still functioning.
You know you're there.
You're watching the breath.
You're feeling the breath.
And then you disappear into the breath.
The breath is just breathing itself.
There's no longer an observer watching.
Mind falls away.
That's what Dogen meant
in that little,
those few little lines that encompasses the totality of our practice.
To study the Buddha way is to study the self.
You start with all the stuff.
All the stuff that we call our self.
The bag of skin.
Everything inside it is me,
and everything outside it is the rest of the universe.
That's the illusion.
And we start with that illusion.
And study it.
And layer by layer,
we begin digging at it.
The layers of conditioning.
Conditioning of parents,
teachers,
culture,
education,
peers.
Conditioning that began at birth,
and has continued through our life,
and is constantly reinforced,
day after day,
by our media,
and our literature,
and our politics,
and sociology,
and science,
and religion.
constantly reinforces the illusion of separateness,
of two things.
And we work with that.
Layer by layer,
examining it and letting it go.
Until we get to that ground of being.
We learn the practice of letting go,
moment to moment,
in zazen.
That's why it's so critical.
Seems simple, you know.
Thought comes up,
let it go,
come back to the breath.
Well,
what you're learning is how to let go.
And there's nothing as sweet,
or as juicy as our own thoughts.
We love them.
We hang on to them.
All the beautiful fantasies,
all the beautiful ideas,
all the brilliant words.
It's hard to let go of them.
Non-attachment doesn't mean abandoning them.
It means not attaching,
not holding on.
And layer by layer, we let go.
We get to that ground of being.
So to study the self is to forget the self.
Once you get rid of all of the aggregates,
what is it that remains?
When the self is forgotten,
what is it that remains?
Dogen says it in the next line,
to forget the self is to realize the 10,000 dharmas.
When you forget the self,
what remains,
when there's no longer a self,
is the 10,000 dharmas,
is everything.
The whole universe.
But there's no longer a barrier between you and it.
You are it.
The skin bag
either has embraced the totality of it,
or has just disappeared.
However you look at it,
it doesn't matter.
There's the merging.
The merging is even extra.
There's the realization that there never was a separation.
And in each aspect of those eight stages of,
eight gates of practice,
that same thing is functioning.
Non-dual.
So in the face-to-face teaching,
no separation is at the heart of it.
In our academic study,
not attaching to the words.
Our tendency in academic study is to want to hold on to the words.
We need to read it,
hear it,
throw it away,
and keep going.
Even in practice,
we need to realize it,
throw it away,
and keep going.
Whatever it is.
And ultimately,
we come to the peak of the mountain.
Enlightenment.
Realize it,
throw it away,
and keep going.
If you hold on to anything,
you've created that dualism again.
So that's why we emphasize,
not only material things,
even spiritual things.
If you hold on to it,
you create an illusion of separateness,
and it's diluted.
Liturgy is also the process of giving.
We constantly give in liturgy our gratitude,
our appreciation for the teachings.
We receive the teachings,
we give the gratitude.
The precepts are another example of
that non-dual dharma,
no-self.
They're based on no-self.
They're based on no-self
and designed to function in the world of differences.
That's what I mean.
You can't,
you can't deny existence.
The Buddha way is beyond
being and non-being.
It doesn't fall into either side of it.
In art practice,
the same thing.
The brush paints itself.
Body practice,
the dance dances itself.
In all of these,
self is forgotten.
But one of the things that's going to be happening soon,
we're coming to our 15th anniversary,
and we've also just received notification recently
that the monastery building and its grounds
has been recognized by New York State
as a historical site.
And it's also been recognized nationally
as a national historic site.
And this will give us an opportunity
to do fundraising to restore this building,
to do a major restoration project
as well as other things that we need.
And so we'll be launching a capital campaign,
a major fund drive.
And I just want to say to the people
who are going to be doing this fund drive
that if it's going to be charity,
it's not going to work.
If it's going to be generosity,
it's not going to work.
Or beneficence,
or donation,
or contribution,
or gift,
or philanthropy,
it's not going to work.
The people
that will give
must also receive.
Otherwise, it's not dana.
Very important.
So the question is
to really make clear
both sides of that.
Form is emptiness.
Emptiness is form.
Form is exactly emptiness.
Emptiness exactly form.
That's the same with all dualities.
The capping verse.
You may understand it,
but it's all in vain.
You may believe it,
but it's to no avail.
You may describe it,
but it still remains a description.
Ultimately,
how is it?
The river doesn't understand,
and yet it knows how to give itself
to the great ocean.
The mountain has no words,
yet it gives birth
to the ten thousand things.
It is here
that the sweet innocence
of dana
is realized.
You see that in children,
that sweet innocence of giving.
and that's the way it should be.
That's the way it should be.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
